Framework: Declarative Python package definitions (#57)
inveniosoftware/rfcs: rfcs/framework-0057-declarative-python-package-definition.md

## Detailed design

We propose to replace the current ``setup.py`` with a ``pyproject.toml`` and a ``setup.cfg``.

Python PEP 517 and PEP 518 (adopted 2015/2016) defines a new build-system independent format for source trees and how to specify minimum build system requirements in Python projects. Full support for PEP 517/518 is implemented in Setuptools 40.9+ (released April 2019) and PIP 19+ (released January 2019).

### Specifying build system

First of all our Python packages should add a ``pyproject.toml`` file that defines the build system:

```toml
# pyproject.toml
[build-system]
requires = ["setuptools", "wheel"]
build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"
```

### Setuptools as build sytem

We could use another build system than Setuptools, however staying with Setuptools allows us to focus on migrating to a pure declarative format for our packages and maintain backward compatibility to a very large degree.

Having a minimal ``setup.py`` as below allow us have almost the entire package work as previously:

```python
# setup.py
from setuptools import setup
setup()
```

> This way tools like Requirements Builder work without modifications and you can still install a package via ``python setup.py install`` and build docs and compile message catalogs via ``python setup.py build_spinhx/compile_catalog``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This way tools like Requirements Builder work without modifications and you can still install a package via ``python setup.py install`` and build docs and compile message catalogs via ``python setup.py build_sphinx/compile_catalog``.
```

    sphinx>=4.2.0

[options.entry_points]
console_scripts =
    inveniomanage = invenio_base.__main__:cli
flask.commands =
    instance = invenio_base.cli:instance

[build_sphinx]
# This option is being deprecated as of Sphinx 5.0 so we
# might consider removing it already.
source-dir = docs/
build-dir = docs/_build
all_files = 1

[bdist_wheel]
universal = 1

[pydocstyle]
add_ignore = D401
```

#### PyPI classifiers

We suggest removing all classifiers except the classifier related to development status.

- License: The license classifier is already specified in the ``license`` keyword.
- Python versions: The version classifiers were not kept updated, and where purely metadata, whereas the ``python_requires`` keyword is actionable and easier to keep updated.

#### Version number

The version number has to be moved from ``<package>/version.py`` to ``<package>/__init__.py``. This is because setuptools is only able to extract the version number using the Abstract Syntax Tree (i.e. not executing the code) when located in the ``__init__.py``. If the version number is placed in ``version.py`` setuptools wih import the main package which may lead to imports failing.

#### Extras require

> We can no longer programmatically define an ``all`` extra from other extras (like ``tests`` and ``docs``. There's two options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can no longer programmatically define an ``all`` extra from other extras (like ``tests`` and ``docs``. There are two options:
```

- Duplicate all extra dependencies in an ``all`` extras (risk of getting outdated).
- Gather as much as possible into a ``tests`` extras (extra documentation needed).

> We suggest as far as possible keeping a single ``all`` extra requires that includes tests and docs requirements. Extra requirements needs to be duplciated into this all requirements, but this means that all packages can mostly be installed via ``pip install -e ``.[all]`` to start development on the package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We suggest as far as possible keeping a single ``all`` extra requires that includes tests and docs requirements. Extra requirements needs to be duplicated into this ``all`` requirements, but this means that all packages can mostly be installed via ``pip install -e ``.[all]`` to start development on the package.
```

This is option 1 right? My vote is for that one too: the duplication is for records listed right next to each other so them getting out-of-sync is much less likely.

### Building the package

The Python package can be built using (without first installing the package):

```
pip install build
python -m build
```

If we use above method, we however need to commit the compiled message catalogs to the source code repository.

We suggest for now, until Babel is better integrated with ``pyproject.toml`` and ``build`` that we stay with using the ``setup.py`` to compile the message catalog and bulid the source and wheel distributions:

```
python setup.py compile_catalog sdist bdist_wheel
```

### GitHub Actions

#### CI tests

Only changes related to the extra requirements is required if an ``all`` extra requirement is no longer provided.

#### PyPI publishing

No changes neeed.

## How we teach this

Above should be implemented in the ``cookiecutter-invenio-module`` template repository so that it can always be used as a reference implementation of a Python package for Invenio.

## Drawbacks

> The benefits of this change only becomes available on the long-term as there are no immediate benefits. However long-term it enables us to improve and automate our dependency management that continue to be a major source of disruptions to the development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The benefits of this change only becomes available on the long-term as there are no immediate benefits. However long-term it enables us to improve and automate our dependency management which continues to be a major source of disruptions to development.
```
